# Lecture 6
## 1. Lecture outline
- Point groups (cont.)
- Polarity
- Chirality
- Character tables
- Symmetry-adapted linear combinations (SALCs)
## 2. Point groups (cont.)
### 2.1. High symmetry point groups
- Higher symmetry point groups are easy to spot:
	- Linear molecules are:
		- D<sub>∞h</sub>, for molecules like O<sub>2</sub> and N<sub>2</sub>
		- C<sub>∞v</sub>, for molecules like HCl and CO
	- Octahedral molecules are O<sub>h</sub>
	- Tetrahedral molecules are T<sub>d</sub>
	- Icosahedral (rare) molecules are I<sub>h</sub>
### 2.2. Low symmetry point groups
- There are cases where a molecule will only have very few operators.
- C<sub>i</sub>, which only has E and i
- C<sub>s</sub>, which only has E and σ
- C<sub>1</sub>, which only has E.

## 3. Polarity
- One thing that symmetry helps with studying is **polarity of molecules.**
- Polarity arises from partial positive charges on a molecule.
- A polar molecule has a **dipole moment**.
- A non-polar molecule **can have polar bonds**.
	- CF<sub>4</sub> has four polar C-F bonds, but all **dipoles cancel out**.
- A dipole moment is a property of a molecule.
	- It cannot be changed by a symmetry operation.
	- It cannot be perpendicular to any C<sub>n</sub> axis.
	- It can be along a C<sub>n</sub> axis, unless there is a perpendicular mirror plane.
	- If a molecule has an inversion centre (i) it cannot have any dipoles.
- We can use the above rules to deduce polar point groups:
	- C<sub>1</sub>
	- C<sub>s</sub>
	- C<sub>n</sub>
	- C<sub>nv</sub>
## 4. Chirality
- Chiral molecules are molecules that can have non-superimposable mirror images.
- These mirror images are called **enantiomers**.
- A molecule will be chiral if is **does not have an axis of improper rotation (S<sub>n</sub>).**
	- **NOTE** S<sub>1</sub> is a mirror plane (σ) and S<sub>2</sub> is inversion (i)
	- Hence the only chiral point groups are C<sub>1</sub>, C<sub>n</sub>, and D<sub>n</sub>.
## 5. Character tables
- A character table can be obtained by applying all possible symmetry operations on a molecule.
- To obtain this we need to consider the orbitals involved.
	- **Orbitals have phases**. Take p-orbitals for example, each lobe is one phase, and there is a **direction**.
	- We notate one orbital as +ve and the other as -ve, then the direction of this orbital is from -ve to +ve.
**Example**
- Water's point group is C<sub>2v</sub>, and it has s- and p-orbitals. It has E, C<sub>2</sub>, and 2 σs.
- For the s-orbitals which is a sphere:
	- E changes nothing, so notated as 1
	- C<sub>2</sub> changes nothing either, so notated as 1 too
	- Same for the σs, so we notate them as 1.
- For p<sub>x</sub> orbital:
	- E makes no change, so 1
	- C<sub>2</sub> swaps the phases around, so -1
	- σ<sub>xz</sub> gives no change, but σ<sub>yz</sub> will, so 1 and -1 respectively.
- We can now construct the full character table for water:

|     | E   | C<sub>2</sub> | σ<sub>xz</sub> | σ<sub>yz</sub> |
| --- | --- | ------------- | -------------- | -------------- |
| s   | 1   | 1             | 1              | 1              |
| p   | 1   | -1            | 1              | -1             |
- The table can tell us about the symmetry of orbitals within molecules, and the groups of numbers for each orbital, e.g. 1,1,1,1 for the s-orbital here, are called **representations**.
	- Each point group has a **limited number of possible representations.** 
	- They are given labels, and all of them are listed in the character table for this point group.
**Example**
- This is the character table for C<sub>2v</sub>

|               | E   | C<sub>2</sub> | σ<sub>xz</sub> | σ<sub>yz</sub> |     |
| ------------- | --- | ------------- | -------------- | -------------- | --- |
| A<sub>1</sub> | 1   | 1             | 1              | 1              | z   |
| A<sub>2</sub> | 1   | 1             | -1             | -1             |     |
| B<sub>1</sub> | 1   | -1            | 1              | -1             | x   |
| B<sub>2</sub> | 1   | -1            | -1             | 1              | y   |

- The left most column is the label and the right most is the function.
	- A<sub>1</sub> is always **totally symmetric**, that is, nothing changes regardless of the symmetry operation.
- If something **can be represented as a function of x, y, or z,** then it is **equal to x, y, or z.** 
	- If something behaves like $f(y) = y$ , then it has B<sub>2</sub> representation.
**Example**
- Consider the x-function from the C<sub>2v</sub> point group.
- Looking at the x function, we know that if $f(x) = x$ , then something has the **B<sub>1</sub> representation.** 
- If we plotted the graph f(x) = x, we can see that **where x is negative, f(x) is also negative, and vice versa.**
- We can deduce that p<sub>x</sub>-orbital fits this representation.
	- Because where we are in the positive phase (+ve, x is positive), f(x) is positive
	- When we are in the negative phase (-ve, x is negative), f(x) is negative.
- x-, y-, and z-functions in this case can represent the p<sub>x/y/z</sub> orbitals.
### 5.2. Non-reducible representations
**Non-Examinable**
- This can be used to find the representations from a **combination of orbitals/bond-stretches**.
- **The number of things we put in must equal the number of things that we get out.**
- We start by defining a **basis set**.
	- Let's use the three p-orbitals.
- We will define them as three arrows from their respective -ve to +ve.
	- p<sub>x</sub> as an arrow in the x direction.
	- p<sub>y</sub> as an arrow in the y direction.
	- p<sub>z</sub> as an arrow in the z direction.
- Let's then apply the symmetry operators of the C<sub>2v</sub> group.
	- E does nothing, so we use the sum of all three: 1+1+1 = 3
	- C<sub>2</sub> using the z-axis as vertical axis yields no change for p<sub>z</sub>, but p<sub>x/y</sub> spins around, so altogether we get 1-1-1 = -1
	- σ<sub>xz</sub> leaves p<sub>x/z</sub> the same but p<sub>y</sub> spins around so 1+1-1 = 1
		- Same idea for σ<sub>yz</sub>, also 1.

| E   | C<sub>2</sub> | σ<sub>xz</sub> | σ<sub>yz</sub> |
| --- | ------------- | -------------- | -------------- |
| 3   | -1            | 1              | 1              |

- This set of number that we yield is the **reducible representation**, which can be broken into **irreducible representations.**
- The reduction process is complicated and I can't be asked to do it since it's not examined anyways.

## 6. Symmetry-adapted linear combinations (SALCs)
- The above process of **applying symmetry operations to a basis set** is used to calculate **symmetry-adapted linear combinations (SALCs)**, which are useful in Molecular Orbital Theory.
	- Also used to predict infrared and Raman spectra.
- The character tables are only useful for finding the symmetry of orbitals on the **central atom** of a molecule, but not the **edge atoms**.
- SALCs can be calculated for edge atoms to figure this out.
**Example**
- Consider water (again)'s edge hydrogen atoms, which we are going to call hydrogen 1 and 2.
- They have s-orbital only.
- After defining their basic set, producing irreducible representations, then reducing it, we can obtain **two SALCs**.
	- We put in **two s-orbitals from the two hydrogens**, so we must get **two SALCs.**
- In this case, we obtain a SALC with one +ve and one -ve, and a SALC with both +ve.

| SALC | Hydrogen 1 Phase | Hydrogen 2 Phase |
| ---- | ---------------- | ---------------- |
| 1    | +ve              | +ve              |
| 2    | +ve              | -ve              |

- Using this we can determine the orbitals on oxygen that can overlap well.
**If the two orbitals have the same phase facing each other, they can overlap and form a bond.**
- p<sub>z</sub> on the hydrogen could with SALC 1, if its +ve faces the hydrogens.
	- **NOTE** If you consider SALC 1, they have representation A<sub>1</sub>. p<sub>z</sub> also has representation A<sub>1</sub> (see above character table for C<sub>2v</sub>.) 
- p<sub>x</sub> can combine quite well with SALC 2, if the +ve points towards hydrogen 1, and -ve points towards hydrogen 2.
	- **NOTE** If you consider SALC 2, they have representation B<sub>1</sub>. p<sub>x</sub> also has representation B<sub>1</sub>.
**SALCs and orbitals with the same representation can combine.** 
