# Lecture 10
## 1. Lecture outline
- Molecular orbitals

## 2. Molecular orbitals
- Quantum theory can also tell us about bonding in molecules
	- This lecture focuses on **homodiatomic** molecules
	- They are molecules made from **two identical** atoms.
### 2.1. Bond formation in hydrogen
- Each hydrogen atom has one electron that occupies the lowest energy **atomic** orbital (AO): the 1s orbital.
- When these two atoms come together they 'combine' and form **molecular** orbitals (MOs) between them.
	- The molecular orbitals also have energy levels.
	- They are labelled accordingly, in this case, σ (sigma) and σ* ('sigma star').
		- * refers to **antibonding**.
- These molecular orbitals **spread across the entire molecule**.
- They are still filled up according to **Pauli and Aufbau**.
	- In this case, the two electrons fill into the **σ orbital and will have opposite spins**, just like atomic orbitals.
- The bonding orbital has a **lower energ**y than the atomic orbitals.
	- So forming bonds **stabilise the electrons.**
### 2.2. Appearance of atomic orbitals
- **Similar to atomic orbitals**, the molecular orbitals are also **allowed wavefunctions**, but for the molecule.
- It is also **too difficult** to solve the Schrodinger for molecules, so approximations, or computational calculations are used instead.
#### 2.2.1. MOs as a linear combination of atomic orbitals
- MOs can be approximated by considering them as **linear combinations of atomic orbitals** (LCAOs).
- Atomic orbitals are the allowed wavefunctions for one electron.
	- Therefore they have **wave characteristics**.
- Therefore they can add **constructively** or **destructively** like waves.
	- Two i**n-phase** waves add constructively (**constructive interference**) to give a wave with **larger amplitude**.
		- In-phase means the **phases of the two atomic orbitals match.**
	- Two **out-of-phase** waves add destructively (**destructive interference**) add to give a wave with **smaller (or zero) amplitude.**
-  ***N* AOs will combine to form *N* MOs.**
#### 2.2.2. Appearance of MOs for hydrogen
- In hydrogen molecules (H<sub>2</sub>), the two 1s AOs can combine **constructively** or **destructively** to give **two MOs.**
- When the two 1s **constructively** add (**in-phase**):
	- The two 1s merge to form a 'sausage-shaped' MO.
	- It will be labelled as 1σ<sub>g</sub>.
- When the two 1s **destructively** add (**out-of-phase**):
	- The two 1s merge to form a MO with **two outward-pointing 'lobes'.**
	- As the half-way point, the two AOs cancel out exactly and there would be a **nodal plane**. (See [[L8]])
	- The two lobes each have a **phase**. (+ve and -ve).
	- It will be labelled as 1σ<sub>u</sub>* 
- The wavefunction of the MO is the sum of the wavefunctions of the AO.
#### 2.2.3. Labelling MOs
