# Lecture 7
## 1. Lecture outline
- Introduction to quantum mechanics
- Light
- Wave-Particle duality
- Energy levels
## 2. Introduction to quantum mechanics
- Quantum mechanics govern how things work at a very microscopic scale.
- It is quite different to what we are accustomed to at a macroscopic scale.
## 3. Light
- Light is a wave, a electromagnetic field with oscillations. It has a wavelength (λ) and a frequency (f). They are linked by:
	- $c = f \lambda$ 
		- c is **speed of light**, $2.998 \times 10^8 ms^{-1}$ 
		- f is in s<sup>-1</sup>, or **Hertz** (Hz)
		- λ is in **metres** (m)
	- Derived into:
		- $f = \frac{c}{\lambda}$ 
		- $\lambda = \frac{c}{f}$ 
- All of the possible frequencies of electromagnetic waves are collected into the **electromagnetic spectrum**.
	- As **speed of light is a constant**, f and λ are **inversely proportional**, and this is reflected in the electromagnetic spectrum.
## 4. Wave-Particle duality
- **Electrons** are emitted when light strikes the surface of a **metal**, and the **kinetic energy of these electrons can be measured.**
	- If light behaved like a **wave**:
		- The **intensity determines the energy of electrons**
		- Wavelength and frequency have **no effect**.
	- **Realistically**:
		- Electrons only emitted if **frequency is larger than a threshold frequency**.
	- Einstein concluded that this was only possible if **light contained particles**, which are called **photons**.
- The energy of a photon of light with frequency *f* si:
	- $E = hf$ 
		- h is **Planck constant,** or $6.626 \times 10^{-34} Js$ 
		- E is energy in joules (J)\
	- By substituting $f = \frac{c}{λ}$ we can obtain $E = \frac{hc}{λ}$ 
		- Hence lower wavelength = higher energy.
### 4.1. Gold film experiment
- When electrons were shot at a thin gold film in vacuum the expectation was:
	- It would interact with the gold atoms
	- Go through
	- Be deflected around slightly
- Realistically:
	- A series of somewhat regularly scattered dots.
		- This dot pattern is called the **electron diffraction pattern**.
		- The dot on there were called **diffraction spots**.
- This only occurred if the electrons were **waves**.
	- Constructive interference = dots
	- Destructive interference = no dots
- The wavelength of a particle is known as the **de Broglie wavelength**. 
	- $\lambda = \frac{h}{mv}$ 
		- m is mass
		- h is Planck's 
		- v is speed.
- More experimental evidence for electrons behaving like waves include STM images of the surfaces of iron and copper, where ripples of trapped electrons can be seen.
## 5. Energy levels
- In late 19th century people noticed that the energy of atoms and molecules are **quantised**.
	- They have fixed energy levels and energy of an atom or molecule can **only change between these levels.**
- You can move them by **forcing them to absorb light**.
- Particles like to have **as little energy as possible**.
	- They are therefore usually in the lowest energy level, or the **ground-state level**.
- For electrons, the **energy levels correspond to the atomic orbitals.**
### 5.1. Movement between energy levels
- As above, electrons can move between energy levels by absorbing and emitting light.
	- The energy of the light must be **exact**.
#### 5.1.1. Emission
- If an electron is in a high-energy state (**excited state**)
- It can **spontaneously** emit a proton and drop to a lower energy level.
	- The energy of the photon is **equivalent to the energy difference between the initial and final energy levels**, or:
	- $E_{photon} = E_i - E_f$ 
	- Substituting equations above in:
		- $E_i - E_f = \frac{hc}{λ}$ 
	- $\lambda _{photon} = \frac{hc}{E_{i} - E_{f}}$ 
- So by studying the wavelength and frequency of protons emitted we can know the differences between energy levels in an atom.
#### 5.1.2. Absorption
- If an photon with the exact energy (*E = hf*, hence correct frequency) comes in,
- It can move an electron from a lower energy level to a higher one.
- Using a similar logic, we can obtain:
- $\lambda _{photon} = \frac{hc}{E_{f} - E_{i}}$ 
### 5.2. Experimental Evidence
- When sunlight's emission spectra was measured, only certain wavelengths were observed on the spectrum.
- Because only **certain wavelengths** were observed
- (They corresponded to the energy levels)
- **NOTE** The lines **do not correspond to energy level themselves but a transition between energy levels**. 
### 5.3. Rydberg equation
- Rydberg produced the Rydberg equation that could predict the spectrum for hydrogen atoms:
	- $\frac{1}{\lambda} = R_H(\frac{1}{n^2_1} - \frac{1}{n^2_2})$ 
		- R<sub>H</sub> is a constant (Rydberg constant) = 109677.581 cm<sup>-1</sup>
		- n<sub>1/2</sub> are integers, where n<sub>2</sub> > n<sub>1</sub>. 
- The presence of integers were not understood at the time, but they corresponded to the energy levels present in the atom.
- Rydberg only works for **hydrogen**, because it only has **one electron**. Atoms like iron have far more electrons and orbitals, and are thus far more complicated to predict.


