# Lecture 8
## 1. Lecture outline
- Origin of quantum mechanics
- Atomic orbitals

## 2. Origin of quantum mechanics
- Quantum mechanics emerged in 1920s as a theory that accounts for **both wave-particle duality and energy quantisation.**
### 2.1. The Schrodinger equation
- Schrodinger suggested that the electrons in a **hydrogen atom** can be described by a function that satisfies a equation.
	- These functions are called **wavefunctions**, represented by *Ψ* (psi).
- The equation is hence called the **Schrodinger equation**:
- $-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m_e} \left( \frac{\partial^2 \psi}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\partial^2 \psi}{\partial y^2} + \frac{\partial^2 \psi}{\partial z^2} \right) + V\psi = E\psi$ 
	- (Time-independent Schrodinger equation for the electron in hydrogen)
	- *h* with a line through it is called **h-bar.**
		- $\hbar = \frac{h}{2 \pi}$ 
			- (h is Planck's'!!)
	- *m<sub>e</sub>* is the mass of electrons.
	- *V* is the potential energy.
	- *E* is total energy.
- The Schrodinger equation is a **postulation**, that is, a suggestion that describes many experiments so it is **assumed to be correct until proven wrong**.
#### 2.1.1. Potential energy (V)
- Electrons in the hydrogen atom experience potential energy due to the C**oulomb attraction to the positively-charged nucleus.** 
- The potential energy (V in the Schrodinger above), is described by:
- $V = \frac{q_{N}q_{e}}{4 \pi ε_{0} r}$
	- q<sub>N</sub> is the charge on the nucleus.
	- q<sub>e</sub> is the charge on the electron.
	- ε<sub>0</sub> is a constant, the **vacuum dielectric constant**. 
	- r is the distance between the electron and the nucleus.


- Given this, the entire Schrodinger equation up to the V*Ψ* term can be interpreted as describing the kinetic energy of the electron.
- The wavefunction's value **depends on the x, y, and z coordinates** of the electron. For every value of (x, y, z) there is a corresponding value of the wavefunction Ψ(x, y, z)
## 3. Atomic orbitals
- Schrodinger attempted to solve his equation.
	- Effectively **finding a value for Ψ(x, y, z) that obeys the Schrodinger equation.**
### 3.1. Schrodinger equation on hydrogen
- The solution to the Schrodinger equation **were the atomic orbitals**.
- Schrodinger discovered that only a few wavefunctions satisfy the equation (**allowed wavefunctions**).
- Each of these allowed wavefunctions has a distinct energy level, given by:
- $E_n = - \frac{R}{n^{2}}$ 
	- n is a positive integer (1, 2, 3,...)
	- R is the Rydberg constant
	- For example, at lowest energy state n = 1
		- $E_1 = -R$ 
	- at n = 2
		- $E_2 = - \frac{R}{4}$
	- at n = 3
		- $E_3 = - \frac{R}{9}$
	- etc.
- So energy increases as n increases.
### 3.2. Quantum numbers
- The shape of the allowed wavefunctions when graphed was determined by **three numbers** called the **quantum numbers**.
- Ψ<sub>nlm<sub>l</sub></sub> 
	- *n* is the **principle quantum number.** It is the **same n** that is in the energy equation above.
		- *n* is a **positive integer**.
	- *l* is the **angular quantum number**. 
		- *l* is a positive integer, 0 < *l* < (*n* -1), so *l* **depends on *n***.
	- *m<sub>l</sub>* is the **magnetic quantum number**. 
		-  *m<sub>l</sub>* is a integer, - *l* <  *m<sub>l</sub>* < *l*.
- The three quantum numbers define the energy and shape of the atomic orbital.

| Principle quantum number, n | Angular quantum number, l | Magnetic quantum number, m<sub>l</sub> | Orbital label |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------- | -------------------------------------- | ------------- |
| energy                      | shape                     | orientation                            |               |
| 1                           | 0                         | 0                                      | 1s            |
| 2                           | 0                         | 0                                      | 2s            |
| 2                           | 1                         | -1                                     | 2p            |
| 2                           | 1                         | 0                                      | 2p            |
| 2                           | 1                         | 1                                      | 2p            |
| 3                           | 0                         | 0                                      | 3s            |
| 3                           | 1                         | -1                                     | 3p            |
| 3                           | 1                         | 0                                      | 3p            |
| 3                           | 1                         | 1                                      | 3p            |
| 3                           | 2                         | -2                                     | 3d            |
| 3                           | 2                         | -1                                     | 3d            |
| 3                           | 2                         | 0                                      | 3d            |
| 3                           | 2                         | 1                                      | 3d            |
| 3                           | 2                         | 2                                      | 3d            |
- So this reconnects the orbital labels we are familiar with with quantum mechanics.
### 3.3. Wavefunctions of atomic orbitals
 - Allowed wavefunctions for an electron in hydrogen is made up of two parts:
	 - $\psi _{nlm_l} = R_{nl}(r) \times Y_{lm_l} (\theta , \phi)$
	 - The first part, the **radial** part, depends entirely on *n* and *l*, or the principle and angular quantum numbers.
	 - The second part, the **angular** part, depends on *l* and *m*<sub>l</sub>, or the angular and magnetic quantum numbers.
#### 3.3.1. Radial part
- The radial part:
	- $R_{nl}(r)$ 
- Tells us how the wavefunction, and hence the electron, **changes as it moves along a distance R**.
- They **decay to 0** as R increases (move away from nucleus).
- If a wavefunction **crosses 0** (changes sign), the place at which it crosses 0 is called a **node**.
	- A wavefunction has (*n* - *l* - 1) nodes.
#### 3.3.2. Angular part
- The angular part:
	- $Y_{lm{l}} (\theta , \phi)$ 
- Tells us how the wavefunction changes as we rotate around the fixed distance R.
- By considering the radial part and the angular part, we can obtain 3D-shapes of the atomic orbitals.

### 3.4. Shapes of atomic orbitals
- The shapes of atomic orbitals arise from both the radial and angular part of their wavefuntions.
- They **do not have a defined outer limit**, and are only drawn as they are because there are no other ways of portraying them.
#### 3.4.1. s orbitals
- s-orbitals appear as spheres
- From 2s onwards there are nodes inside, as their wavefunctions changes signs.
- Like **isosurfaces**.
#### 3.4.2. 2p orbitals
- 2p orbitals appear like hemispheres
- They have a **nodal plane**, where the wavefunction crosses the x-axis, so one side is positive and the other side is negative.
- This is where the **orbitals' phases** come from.
#### 3.4.3. 3p orbitals
- 3p orbitals change signs thrice, so they have three nodal planes.
- They are arranged like positive, negative, positive, negative.
#### 3.4.4. d orbitals
- d-orbitals have a range of shapes (see L9)

### 3.5. Electron configuration
- All the atomic orbitals above are only for **hydrogen**, as the Schrodinger can only be solved for hydrogen.
- This is because for all other atoms there will be **electron-electron interactions**.
	- e.g. in helium, the two electrons are coupled together such that they interact with each other and the nucleus.
- Solution to the Schrodinger can still be **approximated** computationally.
- We can also use existing knowledge of atomic orbitals to explain structure of other atoms, this is called **orbital approximation**.
#### 3.5.1. Electron spin
- Spin is an **intrinsic** property of an electron.
- While **not fully true**, it can be helpful to think of the spins as **clockwise or counterclockwise**.
- To define spin a separate **quantum number** is used to tell us about the spin, like n, l, and m<sub>l</sub>. 
- For electrons, there are only two allowed values for the allowed spin quantum number.
	- m<sub>s</sub> = 1/2 (spin up)
	- or -1/2 (spin down).
#### 3.5.2. Pauli exclusion principle
- A fundamental law of nature that cannot be violated.
-  It states: 'No two electrons can occupy the **same orbitals and spin state.**'
	- 'No two electrons can have the **same set of quantum numbers**.'
- Take helium as example:

| Electron | n   | l   | m<sub>l</sub> | m<sub>s</sub> | Orbital | Spin |
| -------- | --- | --- | ------------- | ------------- | ------- | ---- |
| 1        | 1   | 0   | 0             | 1/2           | 1s      | Up   |
| 2        | 1   | 0   | 0             | -1/2          | 1s      | Down |
- This is allowed!

| Electron | n   | l   | m<sub>l</sub> | m<sub>s</sub> | Orbital | Spin |
| -------- | --- | --- | ------------- | ------------- | ------- | ---- |
| 1        | 1   | 0   | 0             | 1/2           | 1s      | Up   |
| 2        | 1   | 0   | 0             | **1/2**       | 1s      | Up   |
- This is not allowed, as electrons 1 and 2 have the same set of quantum numbers.
- Consequently, there can only be a maximum of **two electrons** in one orbital.
#### 3.5.3. Aufbau principle
- When placing electrons into atomic orbitals, we fill the **lowest energy orbitals first and work upwards.**
- This is because atoms and molecules prefer their **lowest-energy** electron configuration, which is called the **ground state**.
#### 3.5.4. Hund's Rule
- Electrons fill **degenerate** orbitals to maximise the number of electrons with parallel spins.
	- degenerate means having the **same energy**.

| 1s  | 2s  | 3p<sub>x</sub> | 3p<sub>y</sub> | 3p<sub>z</sub> |
| --- | --- | -------------- | -------------- | -------------- |
| 2   | 2   | 1              | 1              | 1              |

| 1s  | 2s  | 3p<sub>x</sub> | 3p<sub>y</sub> | 3p<sub>z</sub> |
| --- | --- | -------------- | -------------- | -------------- |
| 2   | 2   | 2              | 1              |                |
- The top configuration is preferred to the bottom configuration.
- Electrons with parallel spins have less repulsion compared to electrons with opposite spins.
- Each pair with parallel spins produce a stabilising **exchange energy**, K.
#### 3.5.5. Orbital energies
- The energy of each atomic orbital are **not constants**. They change according to the atomic number.
- This is caused by changes in **shielding** and **penetration**. (See L9)
