# Lecture 9
## 1. Lecture outline
- Wavefunctions and orbitals
- Physical properties and trends
## 2. Wavefunctions and orbitals
- Physical properties of atoms arise as a result of their electronic configurations.
### 2.1. Phases
- Phases are regions separated by sign changes in the wavefunctions.
	- This is where the wavefunction crosses the x-axis.
- Where the sign is positive the region, and hence the phase, is positive (+ve)
- Where the sign is negative, the phase is negative (-ve).
### 2.2. Born interpretation
- The **value of the wavefunction squared (*Ψ*<sup>2</sup>)** is the **probability of finding an electron at a particular position.**
	- So tells us about **electron density**.
- If we could take images of electrons in an atomic orbital, superimposing them would produce a image with many points.
	- Higher point density means higher chance of electron appearance hence higher *Ψ*<sup>2</sup>.
- So at a **node *Ψ*<sup>2</sup> is always 0.**
- Electrons are **not particles going around the nucleus**, but **a probability**.
### 2.3. Radial distribution
- The radial distribution function (RDF) can be calculated for orbitals and plotted.
	- $P_{nl}(R) = 4 \pi r^2 R^2_{nl}(r)$ 
		- r is the distance between nucleus and electron.
- It is defined with only the radial part of the wavefunction, ignoring the angular part.
- It tells us the **probability of finding an electron on a shell distance r from the nucleus.**
#### 2.3.1. RDF for n = 1
- The maximum of this function for the 1s orbital is called the **Bohr radius**. It is about 0.53 A.
	- This can then tell us about the **size of hydrogen atoms, about 1 A diameter.**
#### 2.3.2. RDF for n = 2
- **Where RDF = 0 there is a node.** 
	- 2s has no radial nodes, hence **no location at which RDF = 0**.
	- 2p has one radial node, so one location at which RDF = 0.
### 2.4. Penetration and shielding
- The energy of electron only depends on the principle quantum number, n.
	- $E_n = -\frac{R}{n^2}$ 
- Because of this, **for hydrogen**, 2s and 2p are **degenerate**, 3s, 3p, and 3d are all degenerate.
- In many-electron atoms, 2s and 2p are **not degenerate**.
	- The energy is dependent on **both the *n* and *l* quantum numbers**. 
- The discrepancy in energy levels come from the effects of **penetration and shielding**.
#### 2.4.1. Shielding
- Looking at RDFs, we can see that electrons in different orbitals experience **differing** environments. 
	- The 1s orbital is mostly found quite close to the nucleus.
	- The 2p orbital is mostly found further away from the nucleus.
- Between the nucleus and the 2p is the 1s orbital, which **shields** electrons in 2p, **weakening the nuclear charge, and hence attraction.**
- **Example**
	- In carbon, the nucleus has a +6 charge.
	- The charge felt by 2p is **lower than 6+**, because it is **shielded by 1s.**
	- The electrons in 1s repels the 2p electron slightly.
- Overall, **inner orbitals shield the nucleus from outer orbitals**.
#### 2.4.2. Penetration
- The 2s orbital's RDF has a small region before the node, and a much larger region outside the node.
	- The 2p orbital does not have this inner region.
- This is because the 2s orbital **penetrates** the 1s orbital.
- The penetration effect arises from the **overlapping probability distribution** of the 2s and 1s orbitals.
	- So **occasionally a 2s electron may appear inside 1s.**
- As a result the 2s feels **greater overall nuclear charge** than 2p.
	- 2p does not penetrate.
- Consequently, the 2s is **stabilised and has lower energy compared to 2p.**
### 2.5. Effective nuclear charge
- The effective nuclear charge represents the **differences in the environment a electron experiences**. 
- $Z_{eff} = Z - S$ 
	- Z<sub>eff</sub> is Effective nuclear charge
	- Z is actual nuclear charge (atomic number)
	- S is a number known as the **shielding constant**.
		- It attempts to capture the effects of both shielding and penetration.
- As atomic number increases, Z<sub>eff</sub> increases, as Z increases.
- When a electron is added to a new shell with a new principle quantum number (n), the **Z<sub>eff</sub> drops**, as **the electrons experience shielding from inner orbitals**. 
## 3. Physical properties and trends
- Moving **across a period**: filling electrons into the same principle quantum number n's orbitals.
- Moving **down a group**: filling electrons into increasing principle quantum number n's orbitals.
### 3.1. Atomic radii
- **Half the distance between adjacent atoms in a pure element**.
- It can be difficult to say for sure where the boundaries of an atom is.
	- The RDF are **probabilities** of a electron being found at a given radii.
- There is a **general increase down groups**
	- Outermost electrons sit in larger orbitals, so the maximum of the RDF moves outwards.
- There is a **general decrease across periods**
	- Increase in number of protons increases Z<sub>eff</sub>, so electrons are drawn closer to nucleus.
- These trends typically hold until about 
#### 3.1.1. van der Waals radius
- **Half the distance between neighbouring atoms in a solid**.
- Usually for **noble gases**:
	- They don't form molecules with other atoms, so you **cannot measure radius by studying bond length.**
- By cooling gases to a sufficiently low temperature they **form a solid.**
	- **X-ray crystallography** can be performed to find the distance between neighbouring atoms.
#### 3.1.2. Ionic radii
- (See [[CH167]])
- You **cannot half the distance between two ions as the ions might be of different sizes**.
- A equation for this ion in many environments is solved to find an aggregated radii.
	- To get Na<sup>+</sub>, salts such as NaF, NaCl, NaI, NaOH, NaHCO<sub>3</sub>, and more will be considered.
### 3.2. Ionisation energy
- Ionisation energy is **the energy required to remove an electron from an atom**.
- A(g) → A<sup>+</sup>(g) + e<sup>-</sup>(g)
	- The energy required to drive this reaction is the ionisation energy (IE).
		- The IE required to remove a first electron is called first ionisation energy, notated I<sub>1</sub>.
		- IE to remove second electron is hence I<sub>2</sub>.
- They are obtained **experimentally from processes like spectroscopy**.
- Because energy is required, removing electron is always an **endothermic** process.
- The energy for each subsequent removal is **higher than the previous one**, as removing electrons from a **charged species is harder than from a neutral atom**. 
	- It is harder to remove from Na<sup>+</sup> than Na.

| Iron ion obtained | Fe (I) | Fe(II) | Fe(III) | Fe(IV) | Fe(V) | Fe(VI) | Fe(VII) |
| ----------------- | ------ | ------ | ------- | ------ | ----- | ------ | ------- |
| IE (kJ)           | 763    | 1560   | 2960    | 5290   | 7240  | 9560   | 12100   |
#### 3.2.1. Trends of ionisation energy
- Ionisation energy **generally increases across the period.**
	- **Larger Z<sub>eff</sub> leads to greater attraction** so more energy is required to remove electrons.
- Exceptions can be related to **electron configuration** found in locations such as:
	- ...between Be and B:
		- The electron configuration **changes from 2s<sup>2</sup> to 2s<sup>2</sup> 2p<sup>1</sup>.**  
		- The **2s is lower in energy** because it **penetrates 1s and is more stable.**
		- So ionisation energy to remove from 2p is **lower than ionisation energy for removing from 2s.**
		- This is known as a **stability effect**.
	- ...between N and O:
		- The electron configuration **changes from 2s<sup>2</sup> 2p<sup>3</sup> to 2s<sup>2</sup> 2p<sup>4</sup>.** 
		- By removing an electron we have **three parallel spin electrons in the p-orbitals.**
		- This is more favourable according to **Hund's rule.**
		- So the energy to remove increases.
- Ionisation energy **generally decreases down the group.**
	- Atom radii increases, so easier to remove the electrons.
### 3.3. Electron gain energy
- Electron gain energy is **the energy required to add an electron.**
- **Contrary to ionisation energy**, electron gain energy can be **either exothermic or endothermic**.
	- Exothermic means that energy is released when electron is added.
	- Electron gain energies for halogens tend to be very exothermic(particularly F), as adding an electron can complete the shell and they have high Z<sub>eff</sub>.
### 3.4. Electronegativity
- Electronegativity is **a measure of how strong the attraction of atoms to electrons**.
- They are **difficult to measure experimentally**
	- Estimated from bond dissociation energies.
- **General increase across periods**.
	- **Increase in Z<sub>eff</sub>** leads to greater attraction
- **General decrease down groups.**
	- **Increase in radii** decreases strength of attraction.
- Useful for considering **bond polarity**.
	- Bonds polarise towards **more electronegative** atom as **electrons are more strongly attracted to that atom.**
	- This gives rise to **dipoles**.