# Lecture 1

## 1. Lecture outline
- Introduction to thermodynamics
- Basics of thermodynamics
- Pressure
- Temperature
- Gas behaviour
## 2. Introduction to thermodynamics
- A branch of *physics* that links **heat, work and temperature** with **energy, entropy, radiation, and states of matter**.
- It **cannot** give information about the **timescale** at which changes take place, or **how** they take place.
	- This is addressed by **kinetics**.
- It can tell us if something will happen.
### 2.1. Energy and work
#### 2.1.1. Energy
- Applying energy can change many things
	- Volume, temperature (physical properties)
	- State of matter
	- Chemical composition
- These changes can be either **macroscopic**, or **microscopic**. Typically we deal with macroscopic change/interactions, but we will also need to consider microscopic changes/interactions at times.
#### 2.2.2. Work
- Work is the process when energy is transferred.
	- Common types in thermodynamics are volumetric and electric.
		- Volumetric is when the volume of something is changed.

## 3. Basics of thermodynamics
### 3.1. Equilibrium
- Equilibrium is a **state of balance** where there is **no net change**.
- We can model a equilibrium system completely if we know that value to **three of the four state variables**. They are:
	- Temperature, T
	- Pressure, p
	- Volume, V
	- Amount of matter, n
- There are other state variables, such as energy, enthalpy, and entropy, but measuring their absolute size is **impossible**, so we use the above four.
- If two systems are in equilibrium with each other, there is an important law referred to as the 0th law of thermodynamics:
	- **If A ⇌ B and B ⇌ C, we can say that A ⇌ C**.
#### 3.1.1. Reversibility
- Reversible means that a process is **at equilibrium at every point of the process.**
- Irreversible processes have a **direction**.

### 3.2. Types of systems

| Type     | Energy exchange? | Matter exchange? |
| -------- | ---------------- | ---------------- |
| Open     | Y                | Y                |
| Closed   | Y                | N                |
| Isolated | N                | N                |

### 3.3. Extensive and intensive properties
- Extensive properties are **related to the amount of matter**.
	- Mass
	- Volume
	- Internal energy
	- Enthalpy
	- Entropy
- Intensive properties are **independent of the amount of matter**.
	- Pressure
	- Concentration
	- Resistivity
	- Temperature

### 3.4. Units
- List of common prefixes

| Prefix | Multiplier |
| ------ | ---------- |
| Mili-  | 1/1000     |
| Kilo-  | 1000       |
| Mega-  | 1000000    |
| Giga-  | 1000000000 |
- **NOTE** Volumes are squared, i.e. 1 mm<sup>3</sup> is **one millionth** of 1 m<sup>3</sup>, NOT a thousandth!

## 4. Pressure
- Pressure is **a force that we exert on a certain area**.
	- In the context of gases, the pressure of the gas is the **force it exerts on the walls of its container**.
	- Pressure in fluids are **uniform throughout**.
### 4.1. Atmospheric pressure
- Atmospheric pressure need to be considered.
	- Its size is 1 t/m<sup>2</sup>
**Example**
- When a piston reaches pressure equilibrium, we can say that the **pressure of the gas inside the piston is equal to the pressure outside** (atmospheric pressure + other forces exerted.)

### 4.2. Units
#### 4.2.1. Pascals (Pa)
- Pressure is related to the magnitude of the force and the size of the area it acts on. 
- It is therefore defined as:
	- $Pressure = \frac{Force}{Area}, \space or \space P = \frac{F}{A}$
		- F is in Newtons (N)
		- A is in m<sup>2</sup>
		- Hence P is in N/m<sup>2</sup>, or **Pascals (Pa)**

#### 4.2.2. Atmospheres (atm)
- 1 atm is the pressure of the atmosphere at **sea-level at the latitude of Paris.**
	- **1 atm = 101325 Pa**
- In the real world, atmospheric pressure fluctuates with weather and altitude.

#### 4.2.3. bar
- 1 bar = 100000 Pa
- The pressure of gas in **standard state**.

#### 4.2.4. Torr
- Was historically defined as 1 mmHg, or the pressure generated by a column of mercury 1 mm high.
- Now it is **1/760 of 1 atm**.

#### 4.2.5. Pound per square inch (psi)
- As name suggests, 1 pound of force on one sq inch.\

## 5. Temperature
- Temperature is correlated with the kinetic energy, or E<sub>kin</sub>, which is a measure for the speed at which particles move.
- To be able to define a temperature scale, we need to know the **absolute zero**, and the **triple point**. They are the **reference points**.
	- Triple points are when **Solid, liquid, and gas are in equilibrium with each other**.
- We commonly use the Kelvin and Celsius scale.
	- They are very easy to convert, K = C + 273.15
- Kelvins set absolute zero as 0, while celsius sets triple point of water as 0.

## 6. Gas behaviour
- If we know any three of the state variables, we know **the state of matter** and can **calculate the fourth** (See above, section 3.1) using a **state equation**.

### 6.1. Simpler cases

| Name           | Fixed | Law                                        |
| -------------- | ----- | ------------------------------------------ |
| Boyle's Law    | T, n  | pV = constant, so p is proportional to 1/V |
| Charles' Law   | p, n  | V/T = constant, so T is proportional to V  |
| Gay-Lussac Law | V, n  | p/T = constant, so p is proportional to T  |
| Avogadro's law | p, T  | n/V = constant, so n is proportional to V  |
### 6.2. Ideal gases

$pV = nRT$
- *p* in Pa
- V in m<sup>3</sup>
- n in mol
- R in J/K mol
- T in K

- The ideal gas law is the **state equation** (see above, section 6) for an ideal gas. 
- We make these assumptions about an ideal gas:
	- Random movement
	- Point-like particles that take up no volume
	- No interaction except **perfectly elastic** collisions (no energy loss).
- These assumptions hold when:
	- low *p*
	- high T

### 6.3. Real gases
- The behaviour of real gases deviate from an ideal gas.
	- For ideal gases, $\frac{pV}{nRT} = 1$
	- For real gases, $\frac{pV}{nRT} = Z$, where Z is a constant that varies by the gas. It is known as the **compression factor**. It quantifies the degree of the deviation.
- This deviation arises from the interactions between gas particles which results in them **attracting each other.**
	- At **lower *p*, Z is below 1,** as the gas molecules **attract each other.**
	- At **higher *p*, Z rises above 1**, as r**epulsion between the molecules start to come into effect**, particularly since the **particles do have a volume.**
- Given the above, **He** behaves the closest to ideal gas, as it is small and non-polar.

### 6.4. Kinetic theory of gases
- Assuming that particle do not interact its only energy source is then the translational kinetic energy, which can be calculated using:
	- $E_k = \frac{1}{2}mv^2$, if we know the mass and velocity of the particle.
- Building on this, we can derive that:
	- $pV = \frac{2}{3}NE_k$ 
	- **NOTE** N is the actual number of molecules.
- We can now explain the macroscopic properties (*p*, V) using kinetic energy.
- Using the above two, we can derive further:
	- $pV = nRT = Nk_BT = \frac{2}{3}NE_k$ 
	- $k_BT = \frac{2}{3}E_k$
	- $∴E_k = 3 \times \frac{1}{2}k_BT$ 
		- k<sub>B</sub> is the **Boltzmann constant**
- We can see that 1/2 k<sub>B</sub>T is therefore the E<sub>k</sub> of **one degree of freedom**. 
	- A **degree of freedom** is a parameter required to describe the motion of something. For *spherical* particles, we need three for x, y, and z axis.
- **NOTE** When the temperature is very high particles also vibrate, but we do not consider that for now.
- From this we can see that the kinetic energy of ideal gases are **entirely dependent on the temperature**. 
- Using the kinetic theory we can discuss subjects like:
	- Diffusion of gases
	- Collision frequency
	- Reaction rates