# Lecture 2

## 1. Lecture outline
- Behaviour of gases (cont.)
- Energy
- Volumetric work
- Heat
- First Law of Thermodynamics
- Enthalpy
## 2. Behaviour of gases
### 2.1. Mixtures of ideal gases
- Ideal gas law says:
	- Regardless of the type of gas, their properties are only dependent on the number of molecules.
- So,
	- **Total pressure** is total of contribution from each gas particle, hence each gas.
	- The contribution is called **partial pressure**, and it is the pressure of a gas if it **alone occupied the volume of the gas mixture.**
	- $p_i = p_{total}x_i$, where x<sub>i</sub> is the mole fraction and p<sub>total</sub> is the total pressure.
## 3. Energy
- The **internal energy** is the **sum of all microscopic energies in a system**. Energies such as:
	- Kinetic
	- Potential
		- Electrostatic
		- Dispersion
		- H-bonds
		- Dipole-dipole
		- Covalent bonds
- We can change the energy of a system:
	- Increase temperature
	- Increase pressure (Doing work, see L1)
	- Increase number of particles
		- **NOTE** These are the ONLY three ways.
- **Energy is a extensive property**.
- Energy is a **state function**, so the end states matter only.
- The absolute value of internal energy **cannot be measured**.
## 4. Volumetric work
### 4.1. What is work?
- Work is done when energy is transferred instantly such that macroscopic forces are exerted.
	- Lifting a box ifs doing work on the box
- In a chemical system:
	- Increasing volume is doing work against atmospheric pressure (system loses energy)
	- Decreasing volume is work done on the system (system gains energy)
	- Also other types of work:
		- Electrical work
		- Magnetic

### 4.2. Formulating volumetric work
- Consider a piston that is compressed against the gas it contains.
- Work is done against a force F that is exerted on the piston by the gas to make the piston travel a distance x
	- $\Delta W = -Fx$ 
- We can then take the pressure force-area relationship:
	- $F = pA$
- And say that:
	- $\Delta W = -pAx$
- **NOTE** Ax here is essentially the volume change of the piston, so we can conclude that:
	- $\Delta W = -p \Delta V$. 
- Putting this in a macroscopic scale,
	- $W = \int p \,dV$ 
		- Solving this integral depends on if pressure is related to volume.
### 4.3. Reversibility
- Reversible volumetric work is when the object that the work is done to remains in equilibrium while the work is being done.
	- E.g. If you hold a syringe firmly and compress
- In reversible work, **p is dependent on V.**
- Irreversible volumetric work has a clear direction (See L1), and the work was done against a **constant external force/pressure**. 
- In irreversible work, **p is independent of V**.
#### 4.3.1. Irreversible volume change
**Example**
- Consider gas in a piston expanding, increasing volume against external pressure.
- Here the external pressure is constant, so the force working against the gas is constant, so the work is constant. (See section 4.2.)
	- $W = \int^{V_f}_{V_i} -p\, dV$ 
		- Vi is initial volume, and Vf is final volume.
	- $W = -p(V_f-V_i)$
#### 4.3.2. Reversible volume change
- At **constant temperature**, the **pressure is dependent on volume**.
- Because it changes, we cannot simply integrate like irreversible. We use ideal gas law and integrate the following:
	- $W = \int ^{V_f}_{V_i} -\frac{nRT}{V}\,dV$ 
- **NOTE** nRT is independent of the volume - constants, so:
	- $W = -nRT\int ^{V_f}_{V_i} \frac{1}{V}\,dV$ 
- Integrating this results in a logarithmic curve:
	- $W = -nRT(\ln{V_f} - \ln{V_i}) = -nRT(\ln{\frac{V_f}{V_i}})$
- **NOTE** Reversible change **always** does more work than irreversible for the same process.

### 4.4. Volume change in chemical systems
- Sometimes, a reaction can produce gas, which requires volume of its own. 
	- This is doing work against a constant atmospheric pressure. This is **irreversible**. 

## 5. Heat
- Heat is a type of energy that changes the temperature of a system
	- **NOTE** Heat is not temperature. Heat changes temperature.
- **NOTE** Heat does not do work, but it can increase the energy of the system such that the system can do more work.
- If heat enters a system, it's **endothermic**.
	- System energy increases
	- Temperature of surrounding decreases
- If heat leaves a system, it's **exothermic**.
	- System energy decreases
	- Temperature of surrounding increases
## 6. First law of thermodynamics
**The energy of a *closed* system is constant, unless changed by heat transfer or work.**
- We specify closed because open systems allow transfer of material, which can increase energy (See L1)
- If U is internal energy, Q is heat transfer, and W is work,
	- $\Delta U = Q+W$ 
- If it is an isolated system, no work or energy transfer can be done, thus **U is constant**
- If it cannot do work, then **temperature and changes in temperature govern the changes in internal energy.**

### 6.1. Formulating energy, work, and heat.
#### 6.1.1. Constant volume
- Assuming that the value of a system is constant during a process (**isochoric process**), then:
	- $\Delta U = \Delta Q$ 
- If we heat a material, its temperature, and therefore internal energy increases at different rates depending on the specific material.
### 6.2. Heat capacity 
- This property is represented by the **heat capacity (c)**. It is the **rate at which internal energy increases with temperature.** Hence:
	- $c = \frac{dU}{dT}$
- It is an **extensive property**.
- From here we derive two further properties:
	- **Molar heat capacity**
		- The amount of heat absorbed **per mol** of material
		- $c_n = \frac{c}{n}$ 
	- **Specific heat capacity**
		 - The amount of heat absorbed **per kilogram** of material 
		- $c_v = \frac{c}{m}$ 
- From heat capacity we can reverse calculate energy change (see above)
	- $\Delta U = c \Delta T$
		- **NOTE** Heat capacity **can depend on temperature,** but we assume that it is **independent of temperature.**
- Heat capacity can be measured in a **bomb calorimeter**. 
#### 6.2.1. Heat capacity for monoatomic ideal gases
- Recall that kinetic energy is the only contribution to the internal energy of the system for ideal gases.
	- $U = E_k = \frac{3}{2}nk_BT \cdot N_A$ 
		- $c_v = (\frac{dU}{dT})_v$ 
	- $c_v = \frac{d}{dT} \frac{3}{2}nk_BT \cdot N_A$
		- $k_BN_A = R$ 
	- $c_v = \frac{d}{dT} \frac{3}{2}nTR = \frac{3}{2}nR$ 
		- $n = 1$
	- $c_v = \frac{3}{2}R = 12.47 J K^{-1} mol^{-1}$ 
	 ...where U is internal energy, Ek is kinetic energy, n is number of mols, kB is Boltzmann's, T is temperature, NA is Avogadro's, and R is Gas constant.
#### 6.2.2. Heat capacity for diatomic ideal gases
- Recall for each degree of freedom,
	- $E_k = \frac{1}{2}k_BT$ 
- Diatomic molecules have **5 degrees of freedom**.
	- 3 translation
	- 2 rotation
- Using the same process as above, we reach that for diatomic ideal gases:
	- $c_v = \frac{5}{2}R = 20.79JK^{-1}mol^{-1}$ 
## 7. Enthalpy
- When we heat a system in **constant *volume***, all of the energy supplied becomes the internal energy of the system.
- When we heat a system in **constant *pressure***, some energy supplied go to changing the volume of the container.
	- because of this,
	- $\Delta U < Q$
- **NOTE** Heating under constant pressure is **irreversible** - work is being done **against a constant atmospheric pressure.**
- From here we can substitute in the equation for **energy change during irreversible volumetric work**
	- $\Delta U = \int p\, dV$ 
- $\Delta U_{total} = Q - \int p\, dV = Q - p \Delta V$ 
- **NOTE** Constant pressure!
- $Q = \Delta U + p \Delta V$ 
	- U here is the total of all microscopic energies in the system, and the pV term represents the amount of energy consumed in expanding the system.

- Enthalpy (H) is defined to be the **internal energy plus the amount of energy required to make space for the system.**
- It is a **state function** (See L1).\
- It is an **extensive property**.
- $Q = \Delta H = \Delta U + p \Delta V$
- $H = U + pV$ 