# Lecture 1
**Lecturer** Seb Pike | **Date** Monday W1
## 1. Lecture Outline
- Introduction to the module
- History of the elements **(Non-examined)**
- Sizes, scales, and units in chemistry
- Radioactive decay
## 2. Sizes, scales, and units
### 2.1. Lengthscales
- **Nuclei** are $2 \times 10^{-15}$ m, or 2 **femtometres** (fm). 
- **Atoms** are about **50000x larger**, at $1 \times 10^{-10}$ m, also written as 100 **picometres** (pm), or 1 **angstrom** ($\mathring{A}$).
	- Varies between atoms
		- H 25 pm, Cl 100 pm, Cs 260 pm.
	- **Ionic radii are different**
		- Cs$^+$ 167 pm, Cl$^-$ also 167 pm.
- **Molecules** are about **5x larger**, at $5 \times 10^{-10} \space m$, also $5 \space \mathring{A}$ or 0.5 **nanometres** (nm).
	- Varies between molecules, e.g. 
		- Benzene 0.5 nm across
		- Sucrose 0.9 nm across.
- **Macromolecules** are about **1000x larger**, at ~500 nm.
	- Molecule dependent
		- Polyethene ~500 nm
		- Nanoparticles 1-1000 nm
		- DNA ~5 cm
- **Human hair** are about $70 \space \mu m$ wide, or $7 \times 10^{-5} \space m$.

| Unit        | Abbreviation   | Metres              | Notes  |
| ----------- | -------------- | ------------------- | ------ |
| Femtometres | fm             | $10^{-15} \space m$ |        |
| Picometres  | pm             | $10^{-12} \space m$ |        |
| Angstroms   | $\mathring{A}$ | $10^{-10} \space m$ | 100 pm |
| Nanometres  | nm             | $10^{-9} \space m$  |        |
| Micrometres | $\mu m$        | $10^{-6} \space m$  |        |
- We cannot see anything smaller than 400-700 nm due to the wavelength of visible light. We can use electron microscopes and atomic force microscopes for smaller.
### 2.2. Masses
- **Electrons** are $9.11 \times 10^{-31}$ kg.
- **Protons and Neutrons** are about **2000x heavier**, at $1.673 \times 10^{-27}$ and $1.675 \times 10^{-27}$ kg.
	- Note $1.673 \times 10^{-27}$ = 1.007 Daltons (Da)
- **Atoms**' masses can vary greatly 
	- $^1H = 1.007 \space Da$
	- $^2D = 2.014 \space Da$
	- $^{235}U = 235.044 \space Da$
- **Molecules** also vary greatly
	- Benzene 78.11 Da
	- Sucrose 342.3 Da
	- Haemoglobin ~64000 Da
- **Daltons (Da)** is defined as $\frac{1}{12}$ of the mass of a C-12 atom. 
## 3. Radioactivity
- Elements exist as **isotopes**, which are atoms with the same number of protons but different number of electrons.
	- Some of them are unstable, leading to radiation being emitted.
	- Emitting radiation causes **decay** of the element, forming new elements which are lighter (as radiation was *emitted*).
- Ernest Rutherford studied radioactivity from Uranium-235, and proceeded to define alpha and beta radiation.

| Radiation | Particle emitted       | Mass    | Notes                |
| --------- | ---------------------- | ------- | -------------------- |
| Alpha     | 2 Protons + 2 Neutrons | 4       | Blocked by thin foil |
| Beta      | 1 Electron or Positron | ~1/2000 |                      |

## 4. Summary

- Rapid development of scientific theories since 1900s, and they're constantly being tested and disproved.
- Elements exist as different isotopes. Some of these isotopes are unstable and emit radiation, causing **decay** into new elements.
- A wide range of units are used to accurately describe the amounts associated with chemical objects.
