# Lecture 2

## 1. Lecture Outline
- Origin of elements
- Sizes, scales, and times (continued)
- The Periodic Table's arrangement
- Calculating Oxidation States
- Covalent and ionic bonding
## 2. Origin of Elements
### 2.1. Fusion
- Big Bang produced lighter elements up to **Lithium**.
-  Heavier atoms made inside stars until iron. Heavier elements only made in supernovas, up to Rubidium.
- Even heavier elements require endothermic fusion, and are therefore unstable and can decay (see L1) to form more stable nuclei. They are formed in dying stars.
**Example**
- **4 protons** can combine to from an alpha particle, emitting energy (inlcuding 2 positrons) in the process.
- 3 alpha-particles (*effectively* He nuclei), can combine to form a Carbon-12. 
	- **NOTE** Some mass is lost as energy in this process from $E = mc^2$. **Hence a hydrogen atom is heavier than 1/12 of a carbon-12.**
- This process goes up to iron, which is a very common and stable nucleus.
### 2.2. Abundance of Elements on Earth
- The most common elements are referred to as **'Rock-forming'**, as they form the rocks found on Earth today.
- The rarer elements are referred to as **'Rare-earth'** elements.
- There is a large disparity between availability from country to country.
## 3. Sizes, scales, and units (cont.)
### 3.1. Time

| Event                      | Time                 | Seconds                      | Notes |
| -------------------------- | -------------------- | ---------------------------- | ----- |
| Electronic excitation      | 1 attoseconds (as)   | $1 \times 10^{-18} \space s$ |       |
| Ultrafast Spectroscopy     | 1 femtoseconds (fs)  | $1 \times 10^{-15} \space s$ |       |
| Molecular rotations        | 100 fs               | $1 \times 10^{-13} \space s$ |       |
| Molecular vibrations       | 100 picoseconds (ps) | $1 \times 10^{-10} \space s$ |       |
| Lifetime of excited states | Variable             |                              |       |
| Decay                      | Variable             |                              |       |
## 4. Arrangement of the Periodic Table
### 4.1. Electron configurations
**A Level Recall**
- **Two** electrons can occupy each orbital.
Noble Gas Configurations:

| Element | Configuration                                                |
| ------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| He      | $1s^2$                                                       |
| Ne      | $[He] \space 2s^2 \space 2p^6$                               |
| Ar      | $[Ne] \space 3s^2 \space 3p^6$                               |
| Kr      | $[Ar] \space 3d^{10} \space 4s^2 \space 4p^6$                |
| Xe      | $[Kr] \space 4d^{10} \space 5s^2 \space 5p^6$                |
| Rn      | $[Xe] \space 4f^{14} \space 5d^{10} \space 6s^2 \space 6p^6$ |
Knowing this we can look at the periodic table with more sense
- First row only requires the 1s to fill
- Second and third requires 2s/2p, and 3s/3p, respectively
- Fourth and fifth require extra d-orbitals to fill
- Sixth and seventh require f-orbitals to fill (Hence lanthanides and actinides)
### 4.2. Electronegativity
- **This value tells us how strongly an atom attracts the electron density in a bond.** The symbol is $\chi$.
- C--C has no $\Delta \chi$, so fully covalent
- Na (0.9) -- Cl (3.0) has very high $\Delta \chi$, so highly ionic
- N (3.0) -- H (2.1) is neither, so it is a **polarised** covalent bond.
	- Pauling recognised that ionic and covalent bonding are two extremes.
We will realise that elements towards the **top-right corner** of the periodic table will tend to have the highest electronegativity.
## 5. Oxidation States
- Looking at electronegativities, Fluorine is the most electronegative. So it:
	- has a high **electron affinity**, wants to stabilise and form Fluoride ions, very good at **stealing electrons**.
	- is a **very strong oxidising agent**, reducing itself in the process.
	- Always as an oxidation state of **-1**.
- Fluorine can help us reach high oxidation state of other elements
	- **NOTE** Oxidation states are a formality that assumes **purely ionic bonds**
	- Iodine heptafluoride is +7 on iodine
		- **NOTE** Chloride and bromine are too electronegative to from +7 as the attraction is too strong for them to lose seven electrons.
	- Sulphur hexafluoride is +6 on sulphur
	- Phosphorus pentafluoride is +5 on phosphorus
		- **NOTE** Nitrogen does not form pentafluoride for the same reason as above.
- Calculating oxidation state in compounds is A Level, so skipped here.
## 6. Covalent and ionic bonding
### 6.1. Covalent bonding
- Bond enthalpy, or bond dissociation energy, is the **energy required to break a bond homolytically**.
	- For C--C bonds this value is **346 kJ/mol** (IMPORTANT VALUE). 
		- **NOTE** Another important value about C--C bonds is that the length is 154 pm!
	- C--H bonds stronger at 411 kJ/mol.
		- Small degree of polarisation, so some ionic contribution to bonding.
		- 109 pm length
	
**The shorter the bond, the stronger the bond.**

You will need to be anble to draw dot-and-cross diagrams (Lewis structures) and skeletal structures.
#### 6.1.1. Polarised covalent bonds
- O--H is 459 kJ/mol.
	- 1.4 $\Delta \chi$
	- Large degree of polarisation, so strong ionic contribution to the bond.
	- Significant dipole, so not much electron density around H.
- Pauling recognised that all polarised bonds have contribution from both covalency and electrostatics (ionic).
- $\Delta \chi$ is a pretty good measure of this ionic contribution.

#### 6.1.2. Hydrogen bonding
- Bonds like O--H and N--H tends to have little electron density around the hydrogen (Permanent dipole-dipole)
- Atoms like O, N, and F tends to have **lone pairs**.
- These lone pairs can be attracted to the hydrogen, which has a **partial positive charge**.
- Bond enthalpy of H-bonds are about 5-30 kJ/mol.
	- Water H-bonds are about 22x weaker than covalent.
- The part with the hydrogen is the **donor**, and the part with lone pair is **acceptor**.
- Hydrogen bonds affect boiling points!
	- Methane b.p. = -162
	- Ammonia b.p. = -33
	- Water b.p. = 100
- Hydrogen bonds also form extensively in life - DNA, polypeptides, etc.

#### 6.1.3. Dative covalent bonds
- Lone pairs can also from dative covalent bonds besides H-bonds.
- The lone pair overlaps with another molecule's empty **p-orbital**.
- Notated using **an arrow**, pointing towards the **molecule with the empty p-orbital.**

#### 6.1.4. Multiple covalent bonds
- Multiple bonds can from between elements (i.e. double and triple bonds)

| Bond | Enthalpy    |
| ---- | ----------- |
| C=C  | 614 kJ/mol  |
| C=O  | 745 kJ/mol  |
| O=O  | 495 kJ/mol  |
| C≡C  | 839 kJ/mol  |
| N≡N  | 941 kJ/mol  |
| C≡O  | 1072 kJ/mol |
They are mainly found in p-block elements.
