# Lecture 3
**Lecturer** Seb Pike | **Date** Wednesday W1
## 1. Lecture Outline
- Ionic bonding
- Metallic bonding
- Intermolecular interactions
- Lewis structures

## 2. Ionic bonding
- Molecules or atoms gain or lose electron to form ions
- Forming bonds between **oppositely charged** cations and anions.
- **Non-directional**, unlike covalent bond

### 2.1. Lattices
- Cations and anions pack tightly and regularly to from lattices.
	- The large amount of electrostatic interactions stabilise the salts
- Lattice enthalpy varies greatly, between 600 - 4000 kJ/mol
	- Strongest lattice enthalpies are formed when there is a **large ion size mismatch**, or when the **charges are very high**.
	- The energy of *one* ionic electrostatic interaction can be ~200 kJ/mol as gas, but only ~1-8 kJ/mol in water, as solvents can weaken the electrostatic interactions.
		- The weakening ability of solvents is measured by its **dielectric constant**
	- Lattice enthalpies can be used to **estimate solubility** by comparing **lattice enthalpy to enthalpy of solvation.**
	- Lattice enthalpies are used in **Born-Haber** cycles to calculate other enthalpies such as atomisation, ionisation, and electron affinity.

## 3. Metallic bonding
- Metal atoms' electrons delocalise to from a 'sea of electrons' and metal cations. 
- Their electrostatic interaction stabilises the metal.
- The number of electrons that delocalises can be seen from melting points.
	- Metals with high melting points typically lose the most electrons and are also very highly charged, e.g. Tungsten (W).

## 4. Intermolecular interactions
- Three types:
	- Permanent dipole-Permanent dipole (e.g. hydrogen bonding
	- Permanent dipole-Induced dipole 
	- Temporary dipole-Induced dipole, aka London dispersion forces, weak.
- The overall interaction arises from a combination of all three types

### 4.1. London dispersion forces
-  Magnitude decreases with $\frac{1}{R^6}$. R is the distance between atoms. 
- Characterised by quantum mechanics.
- Heavier elements are more polarisable, hence stronger London dispersion forces.
	- He bp = 4 K
	- Xe bp = 166 K due to more London dispersion forces.
	- In non-polar molecules the intermolecular forces are 100% dispersion.
	- Polar molecules have a mix of everything.
		- Water is ~35% dispersion, the rest is dipoles.
		
### 4.2. Lennard-Jones Potential
- As electrons are negatively charged, atoms (and consequently molecules) will repel each other. 
- So we must consider the balance of these forces.
	- To do this we can calculate the **Lennard-Jones Potential**
- We know that the attraction weakens with $\frac{1}{R^6}$ 
- Repulsion weakens even quicker at $\frac{1}{R^{12}}$, while only starting at very short distances.
- So overall, we obtain the equation for Lennard-Jones Potential to be $V(r) = \frac{A}{r^{12}} - \frac{B}{r^6}$
- The distance which the **energy is the lowest** is the **sum of the van der Waals radii of the atoms**.
	- Any closer and we can infer that there is some covalent bonding occurring, as any closer suggest sharing of electron density between atoms.

### 4.3. Summary

| Interaction                               | Relation with r    | Notes                                 |
| ----------------------------------------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------- |
| Electrostatic interaction between charges | $\frac{1}{r}$      | Larger charges for larger interaction |
| Dipole-dipole interactions                | $\frac{1}{r^3}$    | Larger dipoles for larger interaction |
| Dispersion interactions                   | $\frac{1}{r^{6}}$  | Larger atoms for larger interaction   |
| Repulsion                                 | $\frac{1}{r^{12}}$ |                                       |
- **NOTE** In situations that are difficult to compute, such as solutions, molecules and solvents **arrange for the greatest interactions**, and this can determine the shape they adopt (e.g. protein folding)
- Lennard-Jones potential allows us to find the distance at which the forces are balanced.

## 5. Lewis structures
### 5.1. Bonding models
- Scientific models form from observations
	- Why do molecules form?
		- Why do we not see He$_2$?
	- Why do compounds form in defined proportions?
		- H$_2$O, CO, etc.
	- Why do molecules have specific shapes?
		- Linear, planar, pyramidal etc.

### 5.2. Lewis theory
- A model based on covalent bonds
- Covalent bonds form when two atoms **share a pair of electrons**.
- Non-bonding electrons that are therefore not shared are **lone pairs**.
- Lone pairs can affect the **shape of the molecule**. (see section 6)

### 5.3. Dot and cross diagrams
#### 5.3.1. Basics of DC diagrams
- Use all valence electrons on the atoms to form **bonds and lone pairs**.
- If there is a left over electron then the species is a **radical**.
- Aim for **8 electrons** around one atom (or 2 around hydrogens!)
- Tells us about:
	- Connectivity
	- Bond order
	- Lone pairs
- Doesn't tell us about:
	- Shape of molecule
	- All bonds look the same
**Atoms form bonds to lose, gain, or share electrons to achieve a noble gas configuration**.
- This is good for s- and p-block elements!

#### 5.3.2. Drawing a simple DC diagram
1. How many **valence electrons** are in each neutral atom?
2. Guess a structure and draw **one covalent bond** between bonding atoms.
3. Draw more bonds until all atoms have octets
4. Check formal charge on atoms
	1. Count **2 electrons** for each lone pair
	2. Count **1 electron** for each bond.
	3. **NOTE** Dative bonds **formally** charge the molecule.
#### 5.3.3. Bond order
- Bond order can be calculated using $\frac{Number \space of \space bonding \space electrons}{2}$.
	- Effectively the number of bonds between two atoms!
**Example**
- Take carbon monoxide, CO.
	- Triple bond made up from two bonds and a dative bond
	- **Six electrons** total
	- Bond order = 3

#### 5.3.4. Dative bonds in DC diagrams
- Take H<sub>3</sub>NBH<sub>3</sub>
- The ammonia part has a lone pair that can donate into the empty pi-orbital of the boron in the borane part, forming a dative covalent bond. 
- **NOTE** As said above, this leads to N being positively charged formally, and B being negatively charged formally.
	- **BUT** N is more electronegative, so realistically electron density will be close to N.

#### 5.3.5. Radicals in DC diagrams
- **An unpaired electron** form a **radical**.
- The radical can be drawn both as bonding or non-bonding.
	- **NOTE** This changes bond order, so you may have 0.5 bond orders.

#### 5.3.6. Hypervalency
- Heavier elements may have **more than eight valence electrons**. This is known as **hypervalency**.
- **Example**
	- Take ClF<sub>3</sub> 
	- Three single bonds between Cl and Fs, two lone pairs - 10 electrons!
- If d-orbitals are accessible, there can be up to 18 electrons!
	- 2 s-electrons + 6 p-electrons + 10 d-electrons
- Electrons can be localised in this
	- Take SF<sub>6</sub>
	- Four Fs covalently bonded to S
	- Two Fs become F<sup>-</sup> anions
	- S has a 2- charge.
	- **NOTE** Any of the fluorines can be charged!