# Lecture 4
**Lecturer** Dr Seb Pike | **Date** Tuesday W2

## 1. Lecture outline
- Resonance
- VSEPR

## 2. Resonance
- Electron are not just located in a bond.
- Electrons can move around from areas to another, and the different structures that arise from this process are called **resonance structures**, or sometimes canonical forms.
- The electron(s) that can move are said to be **delocalised**.
- **NOTE** Atom do NOT move, they are NOT isomers.
- The bond characteristics are a **weighted average** of the resonance structures.
**Example**
- Take N<sub>2</sub>O, 
- It can be:
	- N≡N<sup>+</sup>=O<sup>-</sup>, or
	- N<sup>-</sup>=N<sup>+</sup>=O.
- The electrons move, causing the charge to 'move' from left N to right O.

- Take O<sub>3</sub>, ozone
- It can be O<sup>-</sup>-O<sup>+</sup>=O, but also the other way around.
- They are notated using double arrows. 
	- **NOTE** The double arrows here are not the same as equilibrium arrows. Equilibrium arrows are two arrows, resonance arrow is one arrow with two heads.

- In ozone, the molecule is symmetrical, so essentially they are the same, and there is no **dominant structure**. 

### 2.1. Complex cases
- There can be >2 resonance structures for a molecule, and the molecules can be asymmetrical. 
- Pauling suggested a 'Electroneutrality principal':
	- 'Atoms in a stable substance will each have a charge close to zero.'

#### 2.1.1. Drawing Lewis structures in more complex cases
1. Count the number of valence electrons in the molecule
2. Start by completing atoms at the edge, so atoms that are only bonded to **one extra atoms**. 
3. Work towards the central atom
4. Assign charges at the end.

#### 2.1.2. Determining majority structure
- Consider:
	- Electronegativity: more electronegative atoms are **less likely to have a positive charge**.
	- Electroneutrality principal: Atoms prefer to be uncharged.
- **NOTE** There is still contribution to the overall properties of a molecule from the minority structures, but less.

### 2.2. Observing delocalisation
#### 2.2.1. Carboxylic acid/carboxylates
- In carboxylic acid, IR tells us that there are 2 C=O bonds of equal length.
- This comes from the delocalisation of the O lone pair after deprotonation,
- So negative charge is transferred onto the carbonyl O, and vice versa.

#### 2.2.2. Benzene
- The Kekule structure showed benzene as a 6 membered triene ring. The double bonds can then push each other to the adjacent single bond, forming a resonance structure.
- This then repeats, so the delocalised structure is just represented with a circle in the middle. This is confirmed using X-ray crystallography.

### 2.3. Notating delocalisation
- Use dotted lines to show bonds that change due to delocalisation.

### 2.4. Bond order in delocalisation
**Example**
- Take SF<sub>6</sub> 
- 8 bonding electrons (2 pairs localised on fluoride ions, see L3)
- 4 pairs shared over 6 positions, bond order 4/6 = 2/3.

## 3. Valence shell electron pair repulsion theory (VSEPR)
- Essentially a method to arrange electron density in the best way possible.
- **A Level recall**
- Does not account for the size of atoms

Trigonal bipyramidal shapes
- The points around the 'waist' of a molecule are called **equatorial** points,
- And the points at the top and bottom are **axial** points.

Pyramidal shapes
- Points at the top are called **apical**
- Points at the bottom are called **basal**.

- Poor at predicting magnetic properties and for valence pairs = 7.