# Lecture 5
## 1. Lecture Outline
- Symmetry
- Point groups
## 2. Symmetry
- If a object has two identical parts facing each other around an axis, we can call this object **symmetrical**.
- Symmetry can simplify problems for us.
	- An example is proton NMR, symmetrical molecules have less environments, hence simpler to interpret.
### 2.1. Symmetry operators and elements
- A symmetry *operator* is **an action that leaves an object apparently unchanged, or indistinguishable from the starting position**. 
- A symmetry *element* is **the plane or axis which the operator takes place around**.
- There are two types:
	- Proper
		- Can be done on a real-life object directly.
		- **Only** rotation.
	- Improper
		- Cannot be done on a real-life object without dismantling and rebuilding it.
		- Reflections, improper rotations, inversions.
#### 2.1.1. Rotations
- Rotational symmetry operators are notated as C<sub>n</sub>
	- n = number of steps to return to the starting position
	
**Example**
	C<sub>3</sub> is a 120-degree rotation, as doing C<sub>3</sub> thrice returns to the original position. In which case we notate doing C<sub>3</sub> thrice as C<sub>3</sub><sup>3</sup>.
	
- If an operator results in no change, we can call it an **identity operator**.
	-  C<sub>3</sub><sup>3</sup> is an identity operator, as it results in virtually no change.
- **The *element* with the greatest value of n is defined as the principal axis.**
	- The principal axis is defined as being **vertical.**
#### 2.1.2. Reflections
- Notated as σ, with symmetry element as the mirror plane.
	- No n, because reflecting twice is E.
- It has different types:
	- σ<sub>h</sub>, where the mirror plane is horizontal to the principal axis (see above).
	- σ<sub>v</sub>, where the mirror plane goes through the vertices
	- σ<sub>d</sub>, where the mirror plane goes through the edges.
		- **NOTE** v and d can be hard to distinguish, as they both contain the principal axis.
#### 2.1.3. Improper rotations
- Notated as S<sub>n</sub>, effectively a C<sub>n</sub> rotation followed by a σ reflection. 
	- Note the C<sub>n</sub> and σ may not be allowed operations.
- This can be difficult to spot
#### 2.1.4. Inversion
- S<sub>2</sub> has a special name, inversion (i). It is effectively turning the molecule 'inside-out'.

## 3. Point groups
- Molecules with the **same symmetry operators** are grouped into **point groups**
- Point groups are named and their names have three parts.
	- Number - indicates the order of the principal axis
	- Capital letter:
		- D: n C<sub>2</sub> axis horizontal to the principal axis
		- C no n C<sub>2</sub> axis horizontal to the principal axis
	- Small letter:
		- h: has horizontal mirror plane
		- d, v: no horizontal mirror plane, but dihedral and vertical ones.
**Example**
C<sub>2v</sub>
- Principal axis order = 2
- No n C<sub>2</sub> axis horizontal to principal axis
- Has vertical mirror planes
- Water, cis-but-2-ene